Hello, welcome to the 13th recording of the "PVC Morning Gone" webcast from Padmasamy
Ling, Kebur-Rimchase Mama Steering Retreat Center in New York. Today we'll be discussing
the 13th chapter of Rimchase books called "The Buddhist Path", which is known as "The
Five Supports of Meditation". So we'll begin with our usual opening prayers, and then we'll
go to the discussion. Thanks so much!
I pray. The supreme tradition of the glorious Buddha Bhagmasambhava, which is the essential
extraordinary view and doctrine of the early translation school, may keep alive and spread
by the light of wisdom. Lord of Dharma, great Hempo, I pray at your lotus feet. In the palace
of the oatman Dharmadattu, the essence of all the Buddhas of the three times, the one who
shows clearly the Dharmakaya of my own mind, you pray to the honorable root guru, glorious
fruit teacher, precious one, dwelling on the lotus seed and the crown of my head. Hold me
with your great kindness, bestow the accomplishments of body, speech and mind.
To begin this chapter 13, which starts on page 65 of the Buddhist Path, I'll give a
quick summary of the first half of the chapter. And so, can Rimchase begin this chapter, and
we'll go to the next half of this chapter, and we'll go to the next half of this chapter,
and we'll go to the next half of this chapter, and we'll go to the next half of this chapter,
and we'll go to the next half of this chapter,
and that's maybe a little bit obvious,
but so they describe joyful efforts as something
that needs to be ideally slow and kind of steady like a river,
and then the second one, mindfulness,
they said that generally our mind is moving so fast
and it has the monkey mind,
so how do we get from, if we do have that monkey mind,
how do we get to a place where we can cultivate this slow
and steady joyful effort so that we can get on the cushion
and engage in these five aspects of meditation?
I think it had a lot to do with just getting that physical support,
just actually giving yourself the time to be on the cushion.
I particularly remember the first couple,
the few times that I sat down and just stripped,
just kind of watching your breath, meditation,
and it's kind of, it's really painful in that way of,
"Wow, I didn't realize how much I was kind of woo."
All over the place, or like other times you sit down
and within the range of like 20 minutes
you can watch this just whole like drama of emotions
just completely erupt, and it's definitely,
or just having that physical, having that commitment,
"I'm going to sit, I'm going to let all of this erupt
for the next at least 20 minutes,
and I'm going to keep sitting with it."
You make that commitment.
I find that the physical support is one of those things that's,
I mean, well, absolutely there's so many teachings
that need to be applied, but I think having that commitment,
taking that time to give yourself that physical support
and setting aside that time is what comes to mind for me.
And it seems like too, once we give ourselves the opportunity,
we have the vision of the teachings and what we're doing,
and we actually begin to experience, like you mentioned,
when we start to sit down and then the spotlight kind of shines
and we see more clearly how busy and wild
and kind of flitting our minds can be,
but then not to be discouraged by that,
but to know that that's part of the process
and keep that wider vision of what's really keeping our goal in mind
and keeping so many different supports.
I mean, all of these are supports for the meditation,
but also just the presence and the blessings of the Buddhas
and the Bhusattvas and remembering our teachers
and all these beautiful examples that we can see
just kind of in the relationship of that,
what we might be aware of, how wild our mind is.
Because I think for that, then that is also letting us see long-term,
not just like right now how we're feeling,
but seeing over a period of time what our goal is
and looking at the examples of the great lineage masters
and seeing what they've gone through in their lives.
So it's not like these little things come up,
whether they're inside feelings or outside uncomfortableness,
but that kind of long-term vision from now until enlightenment,
and seeing that and that kind of thing.
That balance between...
I think what you're getting at is that balance
of seeing how wild and active our mind is
and bursting forth, but then kind of how Rinpoche's here,
as far as your joyful effort,
are kind of emphasizing keeping that long-term.
Long-term goal, long-term vision, really big vision,
not only thinking of ourselves but all the beings
and just always trying to maintain for the long run our practice.
It's like maybe if you think about an example like in a marathon
or something, if we've never run a marathon
and we decide we're going to train to jog or something
or lift weights or you know what I mean?
And we just go out and we run as fast as we can,
as hard as we can, and we've never done it before,
we're not going to get very far,
and we might be discouraged and just drop it.
But keeping that long-term vision and being real
about our current capacities
but keeping our aspiration wide,
it seems like that's a big part of that balance.
I think working with your breath is really helpful
because it's very simple, it's always there,
and there's a relationship between your breathing
and how restless your mind is.
So I find for myself that it's really useful
to account or be aware of my breathing.
It seems like too that just like both of you also
but like Lotro said too, that just actually sit, you know?
Just sit down, you know, in a place
because these five things,
it's an interesting dichotomy between having so many thoughts
and being distracted, and then there's so many aspects
and there's so many devotion and all these other things
and it can seem so big, I think, to some people,
or at least to me, I know that I can have that.
Just a lot of like, there's a whole package that goes with it,
but sometime I think if that is the case,
or I find that with myself, even just to just sit down
and then my mind naturally, you know,
it's like that's part of it.
Sometime that's even the hardest thing, just I mean for--
- Just to start.
- Just to start, just to sit.
Just to sit.
- And I think it's good to remember
all this is just a gradual process.
Like it's kind of in one way, it's like,
what other choice do we have?
What have we ever experienced in this life
that we just got instantly and we are perfect at it, you know?
It's all gradual, all, any training takes time.
And then what other option do we have that deal with our own mind?
Every minute we have our mind.
There's nothing we can do to not have our mind right now.
So that's just like a straightforward teaching in the Buddha,
like we always have this mind every instant.
We have to deal with it at some point if we want to feel better,
if we don't want to go through so much trouble.
And then at the same time, like we're not just this tight racing mind,
like it goes to this point of joyful effort.
This type of laziness we have where we're self-defeating
because we don't really pay attention to the goodness qualities we have.
We only see the superficial surface level things.
And so we just say, oh, I'm no good, can't do,
or oh, this is too hard, or I'm too busy.
A big point of joyful effort is seeing that we,
it's not just this tight grasping mind we have,
but there is this deeper nature, this Buddha nature,
like it's the first line of the chapter.
All beings have the potential for Buddhahood.
In order to actualize this potential, we need to meditate.
Like it's all about revealing that nature.
So the view is all in the sense of we're revealing that nature.
So to some degree we have to connect,
we have to realize I have a mind happening now.
And there is some degree of being able to change what my mind does.
And there's this deeper level of awareness or of goodness,
of heartfelt ability that we have,
that when we tap into it again and again,
then we can grow it.
We can reveal it more, however we put that.
And then trying to say, okay, well, how do I do that?
I have to calm down first, to get a posture,
I have to breathe all these other things that Rama Chas have outlined
in these previous chapters.
And then I have to, well, what is my mind doing in practice?
And here are the points.
What's the motivation? What's the technique?
Am I doing the technique?
Am I doing it with a tight grasping mind?
Or am I doing it more with a wisdom mind?
Like it's more or less, it's a framework for how to,
in a session or in our daily lives, approach.
That's the mindfulness aspect.
Yeah, I mean the mindfulness is what am I doing right now?
What's happening right now?
Anchoring it in this present moment of awareness,
because that's where we always are.
I mean it's not, you know, it's profound.
Like this one, I mean a point that really struck me in this chapter was,
I think it was also later on in the chapter about,
it was also related to this joyful effort, this laziness.
We need to really make a, I mean it struck me,
make a strong impression of our minds and what is meaningful to me?
What is meaningful to me? What is the main thing?
Where is my main overarching goal, like Lai was saying?
Large view, in my life, what do I really want to do with my life?
To really make that a repeated impression, like a strong pattern in the mind.
Like and that's a joyful effort and that's an awareness, mindfulness,
am I connecting to that deeper meaning in my life?
With my family and with my time and job and practice?
Because without that, we're all just going to get swarmed and overwhelmed
with all the everything that happens in a life, in a day.
But that deep, like really trying to connect to that naturalness of ourselves
with that really, what are we really kind of trying to refresh again and again?
What do I want to do with today?
Where am I going to kind of try to aim my life?
And then in that context, this brings on much kind of deeper,
deeper sense of wanting to understand it and try to apply it to.
It's tough, you know.
Seeing this as like a bag of techniques or like it's like a big jumble of things is hard.
Like that's why we're so fortunate with Kemper Rinpoche's and Mipham Rinpoche,
all these lineage masters like Shampo and Guru Rinpoche and Buddha.
I mean, so many lineage masters have distilled these essential study points
and essential practice points in a way that doesn't leave anything out,
but we just have to apply them.
These are like Rinpoche's have said, like with Samayas or Vinaya.
They're just guidelines, these expert tips that these realized beings are like,
"I know you might not believe me now, but do these three things
and it'll really help everything." And that's that devotion of like
trying to just take their advice more than our own personal monkey mind,
little individualistic, narcissistic, arrogant, short-term,
ordinary object focused awareness.
Like what are the people with the like master view, what did they say?
And what did they realize too?
Like that, I mean, of course, but that aspect of devotion,
how we've talked about effort and being really that mindfulness and vigilance,
but then also with that, that balance of devotion is not separate from those things.
But I don't know, in my experience, it seems like too,
devotion has that aspect where with our joyful effort and with our mindfulness,
or like looking at, you know, the qualities of Buddha Dhammasanga, you know,
of the lineage masters and everything, then there's that inspiration to our mind,
but there's also a certain level where we just have that natural part of the path
that's just soft-hearted and just like opening,
like just being open and receptive to something beyond that we feel so close
in our heart and like we recognize so deep in our heart,
but like we're at the same time able to maybe drop some of our harder habitual
patterns and things that maybe block that either conceptually or on whatever levels.
Like the way, I don't know, the way that part of devotion,
the part of devotion that's the, you know, that adoration and the longing
and that openness and closeness feeling where we can relax,
it's like as much as it's so warm and rising and like longing,
it's also that sense of like warmth and openness and like relaxing too
and like being at ease and like that's like very, it's very dynamic too.
It's, you know, but I mean, there's so many aspects to devotion,
but it seems especially that part of how it really opens us to the blessings.
It helps us expand, you know, a kind of more contracted sense of who we are
and what our potential is, you know.
It can help, you know, just really give more breath and space to recognize,
you know, maybe help where mistakes we're making as well as like affirming
in those inner goodness qualities too by seeing them, you know, in others
and just, it's more the same.
It's interesting that you bring up the multiple facets of devotion.
There was something that really caught me about what Rinpoche was saying here,
like that when you're looking at that, the part on devotion,
it talks about how devotion to highly realized beings
such as Buddha Shakyasvili group, Pama Sambava or Tara means that you feel close to them
and wish to attain the same ability that they have to help all sentient beings.
And I just remember reading over that and going, isn't that refuge in Bodhichitta right there?
Apparently the phone agrees.
Yes, but there's something about that.
I never even thought of it that way in that sense, you know, cultivating that devotion.
And how many teachings have we been to?
And everyone that I can remember, Rinpoche always starts with this refuge, Bodhichitta,
you know, standing firm on, you know, in confidence and in the view
and then from there, you know, with that view knowing that you're going to do this
for the sake of all sentient beings.
It just fascinated me, fascinated me too, you know, that how it just, you know,
it all just kind of sizzles in that devotion.
And I think a big part of the sizzling is this, in a more like practical sense,
when we stir fry something really hot, we do it quick, quickly,
keep it fresh, like kind of a little zap, you know,
like in hearing these teachings, Gurur Rinpoche, they quote Gurur Rinpoche saying,
it's one of his final teachings in Tibet.
These like short sessions many times.
Like all this is so, it's so big if we try to take it on all at once
and like have to be the big accomplished something of all this all at once.
But if we can connect to a simple thing, a good experience we've had,
some like deeper balanced side of ourselves,
a good intention of wanting to help someone else
and just in a minute or two minutes, bring that motivation,
relax into it like you're saying.
It's so important to just let it be there and circulate
and then do like really to integrate just really short but very kind of genuine.
I think it's such a profound instruction that all these great masters have said that instruction,
but to really like kind of bring like that devotion and bring it up and let it be there
and then do the next thing we're doing in our lives.
I think so many masters have said it's good especially in the beginning
for the practice sessions for our mind to really like them.
Like we, because we have grasping mind, we're just starting so strong grasping,
we need to grasp on practice, especially in the beginning.
Like it needs to be a pleasurable thing.
It needs to be something we want to do.
It needs to be seen as a way out, as like there's a path, you know.
Like so we keep it fresh, keep it short, like don't string it out and try to add on all this stuff
and then at the end we feel like we hope the session's done.
Gosh, this is so much, you know.
Because then we, that's another habit and then we say, oh, maybe I won't practice because it was so
much.
Just, yeah, that's a crucial point when I started practicing that several people said it like,
one, that no matter how complicated it can be and if you break it down, you know,
there's many aspects, but the conundrum is not really knowing the nature of lines
or all these things that you hear about at first.
So if maybe you don't have that much experience, but if you can connect with these feelings
that you have of love or relaxation and with that realize that,
like this one meditator told me one time, it's the most natural thing you could ever do.
Relax, sit still and look at your own mind.
There's nothing more basic aside from breathing or, you know, as far as, it's just such a natural
basic thing.
And then the other thing that really helped me, especially when I was just starting out, which I
still am,
but said, like you said, stop while you're ahead.
You know, quit while you're ahead, like don't, you know, when you, when you're,
once you sit down, you're engaged in the practice, you have mindfulness, it's still juicy,
it's a short session, then dedicate to merit and then, and make that a session.
And like, I don't know, we used to joke like, how many times when somebody said,
oh, that meditation was so great, I just kept meditating and meditating,
it was so wonderful and I just kept going and going.
And then you're like, watch out tomorrow, you know, like, especially during retreat,
because then it's like, oh, so many obstacles, you know, because it's too,
I've just seen that dozens, if not hundreds of times.
Oh, that was so good, so I just kept going instead of just like, slow, like steady, steady, steady,
you know,
because all of a sudden you're like, well, I meditated so much last time that like,
maybe I don't need to meditate this time.
Or anyway, it's just, I was just thinking of these basic points, how natural it is,
how important and helpful it can be to not force yourself to sit for an hour and be miserable
and then the next time you're like, okay, I'm going to go sit and be miserable again,
but not necessarily the most helpful, you know, especially in the beginning like you were saying.
Of course, ultimately, meditation will help uproot all our habit patterns,
which means there's going to be a lot of bumps in the road, you know,
because our habit patterns are so entrenched that when you look to your mind and your habits,
you find habits that you don't necessarily like that aren't necessarily pleasant.
Otherwise, why would you sit in the practice in the first place
if everything was perfectly fine that you experienced in your life right now?
What's the impetus to work with that and change, you know?
And I think part of the devotion aspect as one of these points
is like refuge in three jewels, Buddha, Dharma, Sangha.
One of which is Sangha.
Like, not only do we need to try to end our own lives in a daily way
to like have some kind of time set aside to cultivate a good pattern
of just checking in with ourselves, being mindful,
kind of trying to apply our techniques.
But it's really so special and important to check in with other people,
other Sangha members, getting together, kind of learning together,
studying the Dharma together, practicing together some,
like inspiring one another, helping one another, being there for each other.
I mean, I think so much is that, and like at the end of this chapter,
they say that defining characteristic of ignorance is we feel so separate.
Like that Sangha of like coming together, like developing these connections
that are so meaningful and just so profound,
based on really these such good pure intentions.
And then really, I mean, it's such a vital support.
And it's clearly like in this chapter, this devotion in three jewels,
like Sangha is definitely one of the three jewels.
I think it's so, so essential and so valuable.
And I think it's also one of those things that's most seen
when you get to have the privilege of being around,
like Dharan brothers and sisters too.
Kind of like a big experience is like, wow,
I didn't know I was kind of missing this in a way.
But some people have a strong longing, really know they need it,
because they have to be around supportive people
that aren't constantly at odds with their vision of goodness and love
and trying to do good things.
Because you talk, I mean, I don't know if everyone has the same experience,
but I definitely remember it before I came here.
It was really hard because you'd sit down
and you'd have that moment of mindfulness.
You'd be reading something really beautiful, some kind of teaching.
And then you'd walk out your door and everyone's being rude.
I mean, like on what level? It's like, okay, great.
I get to practice this, but can I have some support in my practice here?
Rather than having to retreat back to my room and go back to the book,
like, oh wait, there's goodness. Okay, cool.
It's really, really beneficial to actually be with people,
actually put that emphasis on the practices,
having that support of having a practice buddy.
I mean, I was terrible at doing my nundro practices,
but then I got a nundro buddy, and it keeps me honest.
I end up at six in the morning.
And of course, too, like the part of, I mean, of course,
we're talking, we're kind of emphasizing our sangha brothers and sisters.
I mean, of course, just to actually be in the living presence
of great living master too and teacher,
and receive teachings and their blessings,
and just to witness their expression in this world.
I mean, of course, that's inseparable. That's sangha too.
But just how much too, even for a sangha community,
who is kind of all students of great masters,
I mean, our teachers, there's, I mean, of course,
so many levels of like just the greatness
and such a beautiful opportunity and such major, major support.
I mean, of course, without our teachers, without the lineage,
without the Buddha coming into this world.
And then we're talking about meditation too.
I mean, I guess maybe we didn't, we probably,
we're in the section of the book where we're talking about meditation
and actually applying it as the path to,
but the focus of the whole book is, you know,
just becoming more and more familiar with the primordial nature
or revealing our primordial nature, knowing things exactly as it is,
is the path of meditation to, or like, you know,
the first sentence through revealing our own Buddha nature
and become enlightened on behalf of all beings.
And it just is so simple in a way,
just how each one of these things is so amazing,
how they all cross over and interlink and support each other.
I mean, but kind of, I guess the main thing people think about
with meditation sometimes is more, I mean,
with meditation is maybe the first connotation,
is that aspect of like concentration or something being quiet.
So I don't think it's interesting all these other aspects
that really create such good conditions, you know,
for realizing that nature.
I'm just speaking, you know, that's all.
Then I think all these are natural qualities of our mind.
Like these great bodhisattvas have so much joyful effort.
They have such clear, present, anchored awareness that's so fresh,
so devoted, they're just so humble,
they're just so much honor to these great wisdom beings in the lineage.
Then of course they can, there's samadhi and their abilities
that have come from that samadhi are so clearly demonstrated
again and again in their lives.
And obviously their wisdom being able to sensitively engage
with so many beings in such an all-inclusive way
that's so balanced, so impartial, and yet so sensitive and exacting.
I mean, they really, these are like natural wisdom abilities
that comes from like accomplishing meditation in this full sense,
like a full, fully embodying their nature, their humanness,
or their mind, like what the mind can do when it's fully engaged itself
and the surroundings.
So how about real quick, we'll see when the mind
isn't fully engaged with its surroundings.
There's, we're going to be chasing this chapter,
go through the opposites of each of these points really quickly,
just to be a little complete with this.
You see, the opposite of devotion is an absence of interest
and clear thinking about spiritual practice.
We see nothing more subtle than the ordinary objects around us,
so we can't progress in revealing our own hidden qualities either.
The opposite of joyful effort is laziness.
There's three types.
One, we're just lazy and we put off practice until later.
Secondly, we're overcome by our usual habits and we don't practice.
Thirdly, we're hard on ourselves and we ignore our goodness qualities
so we don't practice.
And so all laziness results in not practicing and thus not progressing
or not revealing more of our own goodness qualities
and seeing them in others.
Third, the opposite of mindfulness is forgetfulness.
We don't spend enough time clearly thinking about what is important
so we neglect what is deeply meaningful to us.
We need to firmly imprint in our mind what is truly important
and maintain this awareness over time.
Then the opposite of concentration is distraction.
We're distracted by external objects
and we're distracted by internal imaginations or projections, emotions, thoughts.
By strengthening and indulging in these distractions,
it really becomes a big problem.
And we must firmly work to keep our practice focused while we're meditating.
Then finally, the opposite of wisdom is ignorance.
And ignorance means not knowing emptiness, which is the true nature of things.
We have a strong inclination to feel separate, which creates my ego.
And what's not my ego is everyone else's egos.
And so all these relationships between my ego and others' egos
creates all kinds of hope and fear.
And then by uprooting this ignorance and this grasping,
we experience the great equanimity.
So that was the second half of this chapter.
Are there any final thoughts?
I have one question.
They say another form of lateness is being hard on yourself
and ignoring your good qualities.
To me, that doesn't seem like laziness.
It's something else more negative attitude.
And the other two parts, I can see how they were laziness.
I didn't see how that was.
I think the result is the same, which causes it to be laziness.
We don't think we're good.
We don't think we can develop much.
Or we're too busy.
I don't have time.
That's another way of being lazy.
Because in the end, it means we don't practice.
Like they say, there's an Eastern laziness and Western laziness.
Eastern laziness is let's have tea, or let's have more tea.
We kind of keep putting off the main point.
Western laziness is no time for tea, no time for tea, no time for tea.
So in the end, we put off our practice.
One is a kind of little dull, and the other is a little too busy.
And the other result is the same.
We don't do what's meaningful to ourselves.
We put it off.
I mean, on that same note too,
suspending our disbelief for just a little bit is so necessary.
If we're not at the end of the path,
we don't realize that we have all these qualities necessarily yet.
We don't have to provisionally have some degree of faith
and leave some space in our minds
to let our normal way of seeing ourselves as like,
you know, bad and all these things.
We have to like suspend that for just long enough to sit
and reinvigorate a different habit pattern
and reconnect with a new aspect of ourselves.
So I'll just put it...
Yeah.
And sometimes I think, you know, if you think too,
like if you kind of put yourself in another situation,
we surely should conclude soon.
But like in response to Kate's question,
like that part, think about like,
if somebody else was telling us,
"Oh, you can't do that. You're not good enough to do that."
I mean, maybe we'd feel a little more like...
But you really?
But it's like something, that same kind of energy,
but it's just closer.
I'll leave this kind of take it more,
just like whatever our other habits for not doing something might be.
It's just there seems like all these levels of laziness
are just different ways in which we avoid engaging with what we love.
You know, no matter, we're just all different kind of excuses we can use
that are good, that work for us.
You know, they either keep us from just starting altogether,
never even beginning to even try to start to practice,
or when we're there, just getting so distracted,
we never really progress very much.
Or you know, block it.
We have a lot to say about these things,
but we've kind of run out of time for tonight.
Bless.
Thank you.
Everyone enjoys, too, thinking about these
and discussing other groups happening.
We'll just dedicate the merit, just a moment of silence.
(Singing in foreign language)
By this merit may all obtain omniscience.
May it defeat the enemy wrongdoing.
Run the stormy waves of earth, old days, sickness and death.
From the ocean of samsara may I free all beings.
The precious bodhicitta and those without it may it be generated.
And those who have it may it never diminish,
but always continue increasing.